hey this is precious tall Walker and
you're watching mind your decisions the
psychologist max Wertheimer was friends
with Albert Einstein in 1934 he sent
Einstein a letter with the following
puzzle there's an old car that needs to
go up and down a hill the hill is one
mile going up and because of the car is
old it can only average 15 miles per
hour going up the hill the hill is also
one mile going down but the car may be
able to go faster because it's going
down the hill the question is how fast
must the car go going down the hill so
that it averages 30 miles per hour for
the entire two mile trip can you figure
it out give this problem a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
a solution so before I get to the
solution I want to provide some context
this puzzle comes from a 1934 letter
Albert Einstein had art even recognized
with the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921
in 1905 he had produced four amazing
results including the photoelectric
effect Brownian motion special
relativity and energy and mass
equivalents summarised by the equation e
equals mc-squared
any one of these works would have been a
lifetime achievement and he produced all
four in one year so you might think if
there's anyone who would be able to
solve puzzles in his head it would be
Albert Einstein but even he had trouble
this puzzle was not immediately obvious
to Einstein as he wrote he didn't see
the trick until he calculated the answer
so I think there two lessons from this
first even Einstein had to work
carefully to solve math problems and
second he enjoyed this simple puzzle
just like the many simple puzzles that I
post in my videos so I
sure everyone will enjoy all of the
puzzles that I post even if they want
harder puzzles they'll appreciate some
of the easier problems just like Albert
Einstein did this story is told in GERD
gigerenzer z' book risk savvy how to
make good decisions
so now let's solve the problem we'll
work backwards first we'll ask what's
the time necessary to average 30 miles
per hour
for the entire two mile trip so we set
up the equation 30 miles per hour is
equal to 2 miles divided by T we'll
solve for the time and we get this is
equal to one fifteenth of an hour as
there are 60 minutes in an hour this is
equal to four minutes now let's solve
for the time the car takes going up the
hill well the car takes for one mile of
15 mile per hour average this simplifies
to be one fifteenth of an hour which
again is four minutes so we see the car
takes four minutes just to go up the
hill and it needs to take four minutes
for the entire trip to average 30 miles
per hour and this leads to a surprising
conclusion the car must take zero
minutes going down to get 30 miles per
hour for the entire trip therefore this
is a trick question it's not possible
for the car to average 30 miles per hour
for the entire two mile trip unless it
takes zero minutes to get down the hill
that would only be possible if the car
could travel infinitely fast and we know
that's not possible
because nothing can travel faster than
the speed of light as Einstein wrote not
until calculating did I notice there is
no time left for the way down so this is
a delightful little brain teaser that
even Albert Einstein enjoyed did you
figure out this problem thanks for
watching these math videos which can be
watched for free on YouTube
build confidence for students and
inspire mathematical discovery for
viewers around the world
they have over a hundred million views
and the channel has over 1 million
subscribers please subscribe for free to
the newest videos and email me a puzzle
or matte top
presh and mind your decisions calm if
you so choose you can check my
merchandise you can grab a mug or
t-shirt you can check on my books which
are linked in the video description and
you can support me on patreon thanks for
watching and thanks for your support